# NAFCYellowPerchStudy
Our study evaluated how organic compounds extracted from oil sands process affected water (OSPW) affect the survival and behaviour of yellow perch. 
# Naphthenic acid fraction compounds, produced by the extraction of bitumen from oil sands, alter survival and behaviour of juvenile yellow perch (Perca flavescens)

# Abstract
We evaluated whether naphthenic acid fraction compounds (NAFCs) extracted from oil sands tailings adversely affect fish survival and behaviour. Following a before-after-control-impact design, we housed wild-caught juvenile yellow perch (Perca flavescens) in outdoor mesocosms to assess survival and behaviour under baseline conditions, then exposed fish to one of three treatments: negative control, 2 mg/L NAFC, or 15 mg/L NAFC. We performed behavioural assays (no-stimulus activity, food stimulus, and predator stimulus using a model bird) and assessed a comprehensive suite of endpoints (equilibrium losses, activity, shoaling, burst swimming, freezing, and space use). We found that exposure to 15 mg/L NAFCs substantially reduced fish survival and impaired fish equilibrium in all three behavioural tests. Furthermore, NAFC exposure impaired anti-predator behaviour: whereas activity of control fish increased by 2-fold in response to a predator stimulus, fish exposed to 2 or 15 mg/L NAFC did not change their activity levels after stimulation. No significant changes were observed in other behavioural endpoints. Overall, our findings suggest that a week-long exposure to NAFCs at concentrations commonly found in tailings ponds, constructed wetlands, and other mining-impacted waters may affect multiple facets of fish behaviour that could ultimately lead to reduced fitness in fish populations.
